Fundamentals/Database/Indexing/README.md, before:

# Indexing

Indexes organize and group information into smaller buckets using an grouping algorithm, usually a hash.
This optimizes the search of this information where now the search has to just narrow the right bucket, rather
than do a scan of the entire information.

Consider a telephone directory to find a phone number and the amount of time it would take if it were not indexed/ordered in anyway, they are just random or ordered by insertion order.

## Database Indexing

Table scanning in databases is usually slow, so indexes are needed to avoid scans and speed up the processes, be wary
indexes are not the silver bullet for database performance, they come at a cost of space and memory, having too many
indexes can be counter productive.

When data is stored on disk-based storage devices, it is stored as blocks of data. These blocks are accessed in their entirety, making them the atomic disk access operation. Disk blocks are structured in much the same way as linked lists; both contain a section for data, a pointer to the location of the next node (or block), and both need not be stored contiguously.

Due to the fact that a number of records can only be sorted on one field, we can state that searching on a field that isn’t sorted requires a Linear Search which requires (N+1)/2 block accesses (on average), where N is the number of blocks that the table spans. If that field is a non-key field (i.e. doesn’t contain unique entries) then the entire tablespace must be searched at N block accesses.

Whereas with a sorted field, a Binary Search may be used, which has log2 N block accesses. Also since the data is sorted given a non-key field, the rest of the table doesn’t need to be searched for duplicate values, once a higher value is found. Thus the performance increase is substantial.

### **What is indexing?**

Indexing is a way of sorting a number of records on multiple fields. Creating an index on a field in a table creates another data structure which holds the field value, and a pointer to the record it relates to. This index structure is then sorted, allowing Binary Searches to be performed on it.

The downside to indexing is that these indices require additional space on the disk since the indices are stored together in a table using the MyISAM engine, this file can quickly reach the size limits of the underlying file system if many fields within the same table are indexed.

### **How does it work?**

Firstly, let’s outline a sample database table schema;

Field name | Data type | Size on disk
-----------|-----------|-------------
id (Primary key) Unsigned INT | 4 bytes
firstName | Char(50) | 50 bytes
lastName | Char(50) | 50 bytes

*Note*: char was used in place of varchar to allow for an accurate size on disk value. This sample database contains five million rows and is unindexed. The performance of several queries will now be analyzed. These are a query using the id (a sorted key field) and one using the firstName (a non-key unsorted field).

### **Example 1 - sorted vs unsorted fields**

Given our sample database of r = 5,000,000 records of a fixed size giving a record length of R = 204 bytes and they are stored in a table using the MyISAM engine which is using the default block size B = 1,024 bytes. The blocking factor of the table would be bfr = (B/R) = 1024/204 = 5 records per disk block. The total number of blocks required to hold the table is `N = (r/bfr) = 5000000/5 = 1,000,000 blocks`.

A linear search on the id field would require an average of N/2 = 500,000 block accesses to find a value, given that the id field is a key field. But since the id field is also sorted, a binary search can be conducted requiring an average of log2 1000000 = 19.93 = 20 block accesses. Instantly we can see this is a drastic improvement.

Now the firstName field is neither sorted nor a key field, so a binary search is impossible, nor are the values unique, and thus the table will require searching to the end for an exact N = 1,000,000 block accesses. It is this situation that indexing aims to correct.

Given that an index record contains only the indexed field and a pointer to the original record, it stands to reason that it will be smaller than the multi-field record that it points to. So the index itself requires fewer disk blocks than the original table, which therefore requires fewer block accesses to iterate through. The schema for an index on the firstName field is outlined below;

Field name | Data type | Size on disk
-----------|-----------|-------------
firstName | Char(50) | 50 bytes
(record pointer) Special | 4 bytes

_Note: Pointers in MySQL are 2, 3, 4 or 5 bytes in length depending on the size of the table_.

### **Example 2 - indexing**

Given our sample database of r = 5,000,000 records with an index record length of R = 54 bytes and using the default block size B = 1,024 bytes. The blocking factor of the index would be bfr = (B/R) = 1024/54 = 18 records per disk block. The total number of blocks required to hold the index is N = (r/bfr) = 5000000/18 = 277,778 blocks.

Now a search using the firstName field can utilize the index to increase performance. This allows for a binary search of the index with an average of log2 277778 = 18.08 = 19 block accesses. To find the address of the actual record, which requires a further block access to read, bringing the total to 19 + 1 = 20 block accesses, a far cry from the 1,000,000 block accesses required to find a firstName match in the non-indexed table.
**

### **When should it be used?**

Given that creating an index requires additional disk space (277,778 blocks extra from the above example, a ~28% increase), and that too many indices can cause issues arising from the file systems size limits, careful thought must be used to select the correct fields to index.

Since indices are only used to speed up the searching for a matching field within the records, it stands to reason that indexing fields used only for output would be simply a waste of disk space and processing time when doing an insert or delete operation, and thus should be avoided. Also given the nature of a binary search, the cardinality or uniqueness of the data is important. Indexing on a field with a cardinality of 2 would split the data in half, whereas a cardinality of 1,000 would return approximately 1,000 records. With such a low cardinality the effectiveness is reduced to a linear sort, and the query optimizer will avoid using the index if the cardinality is less than 30% of the record number, effectively making the index a waste of space.

## **MySQL InnoDB Vs Postgres Indexing Stratergies**

![MySQL Vs InnoDB indexing Stratergy](images/different-indexing-stratergies-myql-vs-postgres.png)

Postgres attaches indexes directly to the table, so an update or delete on the table could slow down because multiple
indexes will have to fight for resources.

However MySQL InnoDB creates a index only on the primary key and any other index attached to the table would be set to
the primary key index, so it would only get re-indexed only when the primary key is deleted or there is an update,
increasing write speeds.

## Further Reading

- [Indexing in PostgreSQL vs MySQL - Youtube](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=T9n_-_oLrbM&ab_channel=HusseinNasser)
- [Database Indexing Explained (with PostgreSQL) - Youtube](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-qNSXK7s7_w&ab_channel=HusseinNasser)
- [Indexing in Databases Set 1](https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/indexing-in-databases-set-1/)
- [Top 10 performance tuning tips for relational databases](https://www.synametrics.com/SynametricsWebApp/WPTop10Tips.jsp)
- [Query optimization techniques in SQL Server: Database Design and Architecture](https://www.sqlshack.com/query-optimization-techniques-in-sql-server-database-design-and-architecture/)
- [Indexing in DBMS: What is, Types of Indexes with EXAMPLES](https://www.guru99.com/indexing-in-database.html)
- [Using Database Indexes Tutorial](https://www.progress.com/tutorials/odbc/using-indexes)
- [How does database indexing work - Stackoverflow](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/1108/how-does-database-indexing-work)

Commit message:

Things every dev should know about Indexes

Fundamentals/Database/Indexing/README.md, after:

# Indexing

Indexes organize and group information into smaller buckets using an grouping algorithm, usually a hash.
This optimizes the search of this information where now the search has to just narrow the right bucket, rather
than do a scan of the entire information.

Consider a telephone directory to find a phone number and the amount of time it would take if it were not indexed/ordered in anyway, they are just random or ordered by insertion order.

## Database Indexing

Table scanning in databases is usually slow, so indexes are needed to avoid scans and speed up the processes, be wary
indexes are not the silver bullet for database performance, they come at a cost of space and memory, having too many
indexes can be counter productive.

When data is stored on disk-based storage devices, it is stored as blocks of data. These blocks are accessed in their entirety, making them the atomic disk access operation. Disk blocks are structured in much the same way as linked lists; both contain a section for data, a pointer to the location of the next node (or block), and both need not be stored contiguously.

Due to the fact that a number of records can only be sorted on one field, we can state that searching on a field that isn’t sorted requires a Linear Search which requires (N+1)/2 block accesses (on average), where N is the number of blocks that the table spans. If that field is a non-key field (i.e. doesn’t contain unique entries) then the entire tablespace must be searched at N block accesses.

Whereas with a sorted field, a Binary Search may be used, which has log2 N block accesses. Also since the data is sorted given a non-key field, the rest of the table doesn’t need to be searched for duplicate values, once a higher value is found. Thus the performance increase is substantial.

### **What is indexing?**

Indexing is a way of sorting a number of records on multiple fields. Creating an index on a field in a table creates another data structure which holds the field value, and a pointer to the record it relates to. This index structure is then sorted, allowing Binary Searches to be performed on it.

The downside to indexing is that these indices require additional space on the disk since the indices are stored together in a table using the MyISAM engine, this file can quickly reach the size limits of the underlying file system if many fields within the same table are indexed.

### **How does it work?**

Firstly, let’s outline a sample database table schema;

Field name | Data type | Size on disk
-----------|-----------|-------------
id (Primary key) Unsigned INT | 4 bytes
firstName | Char(50) | 50 bytes
lastName | Char(50) | 50 bytes

*Note*: char was used in place of varchar to allow for an accurate size on disk value. This sample database contains five million rows and is unindexed. The performance of several queries will now be analyzed. These are a query using the id (a sorted key field) and one using the firstName (a non-key unsorted field).

### **Example 1 - sorted vs unsorted fields**

Given our sample database of r = 5,000,000 records of a fixed size giving a record length of R = 204 bytes and they are stored in a table using the MyISAM engine which is using the default block size B = 1,024 bytes. The blocking factor of the table would be bfr = (B/R) = 1024/204 = 5 records per disk block. The total number of blocks required to hold the table is `N = (r/bfr) = 5000000/5 = 1,000,000 blocks`.

A linear search on the id field would require an average of N/2 = 500,000 block accesses to find a value, given that the id field is a key field. But since the id field is also sorted, a binary search can be conducted requiring an average of log2 1000000 = 19.93 = 20 block accesses. Instantly we can see this is a drastic improvement.

Now the firstName field is neither sorted nor a key field, so a binary search is impossible, nor are the values unique, and thus the table will require searching to the end for an exact N = 1,000,000 block accesses. It is this situation that indexing aims to correct.

Given that an index record contains only the indexed field and a pointer to the original record, it stands to reason that it will be smaller than the multi-field record that it points to. So the index itself requires fewer disk blocks than the original table, which therefore requires fewer block accesses to iterate through. The schema for an index on the firstName field is outlined below;

Field name | Data type | Size on disk
-----------|-----------|-------------
firstName | Char(50) | 50 bytes
(record pointer) Special | 4 bytes

_Note: Pointers in MySQL are 2, 3, 4 or 5 bytes in length depending on the size of the table_.

### **Example 2 - indexing**

Given our sample database of r = 5,000,000 records with an index record length of R = 54 bytes and using the default block size B = 1,024 bytes. The blocking factor of the index would be bfr = (B/R) = 1024/54 = 18 records per disk block. The total number of blocks required to hold the index is N = (r/bfr) = 5000000/18 = 277,778 blocks.

Now a search using the firstName field can utilize the index to increase performance. This allows for a binary search of the index with an average of log2 277778 = 18.08 = 19 block accesses. To find the address of the actual record, which requires a further block access to read, bringing the total to 19 + 1 = 20 block accesses, a far cry from the 1,000,000 block accesses required to find a firstName match in the non-indexed table.
**

### **When should it be used?**

Given that creating an index requires additional disk space (277,778 blocks extra from the above example, a ~28% increase), and that too many indices can cause issues arising from the file systems size limits, careful thought must be used to select the correct fields to index.

Since indices are only used to speed up the searching for a matching field within the records, it stands to reason that indexing fields used only for output would be simply a waste of disk space and processing time when doing an insert or delete operation, and thus should be avoided. Also given the nature of a binary search, the cardinality or uniqueness of the data is important. Indexing on a field with a cardinality of 2 would split the data in half, whereas a cardinality of 1,000 would return approximately 1,000 records. With such a low cardinality the effectiveness is reduced to a linear sort, and the query optimizer will avoid using the index if the cardinality is less than 30% of the record number, effectively making the index a waste of space.

### **What is the impact on Indexes on memory ?**


### **What is the impact on Indexes on disk ?**


## **MySQL InnoDB Vs Postgres Indexing Stratergies**

![MySQL Vs InnoDB indexing Stratergy](images/different-indexing-stratergies-myql-vs-postgres.png)

Postgres attaches indexes directly to the table, so an update or delete on the table could slow down because multiple
indexes will have to fight for resources.

However MySQL InnoDB creates a index only on the primary key and any other index attached to the table would be set to
the primary key index, so it would only get re-indexed only when the primary key is deleted or there is an update,
increasing write speeds.

## **Things Every developer should know about Indexes**

[A few things to keep in mind when working with indexes](things-every-dev-should-know-about-indexing.MD)

## Further Reading

- [Indexing in PostgreSQL vs MySQL - Youtube](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=T9n_-_oLrbM&ab_channel=HusseinNasser)
- [Database Indexing Explained (with PostgreSQL) - Youtube](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-qNSXK7s7_w&ab_channel=HusseinNasser)
- [Indexing in Databases Set 1](https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/indexing-in-databases-set-1/)
- [Top 10 performance tuning tips for relational databases](https://www.synametrics.com/SynametricsWebApp/WPTop10Tips.jsp)
- [Query optimization techniques in SQL Server: Database Design and Architecture](https://www.sqlshack.com/query-optimization-techniques-in-sql-server-database-design-and-architecture/)
- [Indexing in DBMS: What is, Types of Indexes with EXAMPLES](https://www.guru99.com/indexing-in-database.html)
- [Using Database Indexes Tutorial](https://www.progress.com/tutorials/odbc/using-indexes)
- [How does database indexing work - Stackoverflow](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/1108/how-does-database-indexing-work)
